README.adoc, before:

capnp-ocaml
===========

This is an http://ocaml.org[OCaml] code generator plugin for the
http://kentonv.github.io/capnproto[Cap\'n Proto] serialization framework.

This plugin is roughly feature-complete for the Cap\'n Proto basic serialization.
The RPC feature set is not supported at this time.

Design Notes
------------
The generated code follows the general Cap\'n Proto convention of using the
serialized message format as the in-memory data structure representation. This
enables the "infinitely faster" performance characteristic, but it also means
that the generated code is not directly compatible with OCaml records, arrays,
etc.

The generated code is functorized over the underlying message format. This
enables client code to operate equally well on messages stored as--for
example--OCaml `bytes` buffers or OCaml `Bigarray` (perhaps most interesting
for applications involving `mmap()`).

Generated Code
--------------
The Cap\'n Proto types are mapped to OCaml types as follows:

.Type mapping
[width="50%",cols="2",options="header"]
|================================================
| Cap\'n Proto Type | OCaml Type
| `Void`            | `unit`
| `Bool`            | `bool`
| `Int8`            | `int`
| `Int16`           | `int`
| `Int32`           | `int32`
| `Int64`           | `int64`
| `UInt8`           | `int`
| `UInt16`          | `int`
| `UInt32`          | `Uint32.t` (from https://github.com/andrenth/ocaml-uint[`uint`] library)
| `UInt64`          | `Uint64.t` (from https://github.com/andrenth/ocaml-uint[`uint`] library)
| `Float32`         | `float`
| `Float64`         | `float`
| `Text`            | `string`
| `Data`            | `string`
| `List<T>`         | `('a, T, 'b) Capnp.Array.t`
|================================================

The `Capnp.Array` module is roughly API-compatible with OCaml arrays and
provides similar performance characteristics.

A Cap\'n Proto struct maps to an OCaml module.  The generated module hierarchy
reflects the hierarchy of structs specified in the schema file.  For example,
the Cap\'n Proto schema
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@0xbdb65202adbdc4a0;

struct Outer1 {
  struct Inner {
  }
}

struct Outer2 {
}
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
would yield a generated module with the signature
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
module type S = sig
  module Reader : sig
    module Outer1 : sig
      type t

      module Inner : sig
        type t

        (* Read-only accessors for Inner.t *)
        ...
      end

      (* Read-only accessors for Outer1.t *)
      ...
    end

    module Outer2 : sig
      type t

      (* Read-only accessors for Outer2.t *)
      ...
    end
    ...
  end

  module Builder : sig
    module Outer1 : sig
      type t

      module Inner : sig
        type t

        (* Read/write accessors for Inner.t *)
        ...
      end

      (* Read/write accessors for Outer1.t *)
      ...
    end

    module Outer2 : sig
      type t

      (* Read/write accessors for Outer2.t *)
      ...
    end
    ...
  end
end
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The `Reader` and `Builder` submodules provide read-only and read/write message
accessors, respectively.  The accessors for struct fields are constructed as
follows:

Primitive Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
A struct field `foo` of primitive type will result in generation of the
following accessors:
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(* for field 'foo' of type Void *)
val foo_get : t -> unit
val foo_set : t -> unit -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Bool *)
val foo_get : t -> bool
val foo_set : t -> bool -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Float32 or Float64 *)
val foo_get : t -> float
val foo_set : t -> float -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Text or Data *)
val has_foo : t -> bool
val foo_get : t -> string
val foo_set : t -> string -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Int8 *)
val foo_get : t -> int
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of Int8 range *)
val foo_set_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Int16 *)
val foo_get : t -> int
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of Int16 range *)
val foo_set_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Int32 *)
val foo_get : t -> int32
(* Raise [Message.Out_of_int_range] if not representable as int *)
val foo_get_int_exn : t -> int
val foo_set : t -> int32 -> unit
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of Int32 range *)
val foo_set_int_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Int64 *)
val foo_get : t -> int64
(* Raise [Message.Out_of_int_range] if not representable as int *)
val foo_get_int_exn : t -> int
val foo_set : t -> int64 -> unit
val foo_set_int : t -> int

(* for field 'foo' of type UInt8 *)
val foo_get : t -> int
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of UInt8 range *)
val foo_set_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type UInt16 *)
val foo_get : t -> int
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of UInt16 range *)
val foo_set_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type UInt32 *)
val foo_get : t -> Uint32.t
(* Raise [Message.Out_of_int_range] if not representable as int *)
val foo_get_int_exn : t -> int
val foo_set : t -> Uint32.t -> unit
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of UInt32 range *)
val foo_set_int_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type UInt64 *)
val foo_get : t -> Uint64.t
(* Raise [Message.Out_of_int_range] if not representable as int *)
val foo_get_int_exn : t -> int
val foo_set : t -> Uint64.t -> unit
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of UInt64 range *)
val foo_set_int_exn : t -> int -> unit
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
`_get` accessors will be available in both the `Reader` and the `Builder`
modules; `_set` accessors will be available only for `Builder` types.

Embedded Struct Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
A struct field `foo` which is of struct type will result in generation of
the following accessors:
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(* Assuming that field foo has generated type Foo.t... *)

(** [has_foo s] returns [true] if field [foo] was set in structure [s]. *)
val has_foo : t -> bool

(** [foo_init s] initializes the value of field [foo] to the default value
    for its type.

    @return a reference to the content of field [foo] *)
val foo_init : t -> Foo.t

(** [foo_get s] gets a reference to the content of field [foo].  (For the
    Builder implementation, if the field was not previously initialized
    then as a side-effect this function will default-initialize the
    structure and cause [has_foo s] to return [true].)

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_get : t -> Foo.t

(** [foo_set_reader s v] sets the content of field [foo] by making a deep
    copy of the Reader-typed structure.

    @return reference to the content of field [foo]

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_set_reader : t -> Reader.Foo.t -> Builder.Foo.t

(** [foo_set_builder s v] sets the content of field [foo] by making a deep
    copy of the Builder-typed structure.

    @return reference to the content of field [foo]

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_set_builder : t -> Builder.Foo.t -> Builder.Foo.t
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

List Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~
A struct field `foo` which is of list type will result in generation of
the following accessors:
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(* Assuming that field foo contains values of type Inner... *)

(** [has_foo s] returns [true] if field [foo] was set in structure [s]. *)
val has_foo : t -> bool

(** [foo_init s n] initializes field [foo] to a zero-initialized list of
    length [n] (i.e. primitive types are initialized as zero, struct types
    are initialized as the default value for the struct type).

    @return a reference to the content of field [foo] *)
val foo_init : t -> int -> (rw, Inner.t, 'a) Capnp.Array.t

(** [foo_get s] gets a reference to the content of field [foo].  (For the
    Builder implementation, if the field was not previously initialized
    then as a side-effect this function will default-initialize the
    list and cause [has_foo s] to return [true].)

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_get : t -> ('cap, Inner.t, 'arr) Capnp.Array.t

(** [foo_get_list s] creates an OCaml list containing the content of
    field [foo].

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_get_list : t -> Inner.t list

(** [foo_get_array s] creates an OCaml array containing the content of
    field [foo].

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_get_array : t -> Inner.t array

(** [foo_set s v] sets the content of field [foo] by creating a deep copy
    of list [v].  (This may result in reallocation of [foo], which may
    lead to poor performance.)

    @return a reference to the content of field [foo]

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_set : t -> ('cap, Inner.t, 'a) Capnp.Array.t ->
                (rw, Inner.t, 'b) Capnp.Array.t

(** [foo_set_list s v] sets the content of field [foo] from OCaml list [v].
    (This may result in reallocation of [foo], which may lead to poor
    performance.)

    @return a reference to the content of field [foo]

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_set_list : t -> Inner.t list -> (rw, Inner.t, 'b) Capnp.Array.t

(** [foo_set_array s v] sets the content of field [foo] from OCaml array [v].
    (This may result in reallocation of [foo], which may lead to poor
    performance.)

    @return a reference to the content of field [foo]

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_set_array : t -> Inner.t array -> (rw, Inner.t, 'b) Capnp.Array.t
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Union Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~~
Cap\'n Proto has first-class support for union (sum) types.  These are mapped
to OCaml variants in a straightforward way.  To retrieve a union value,
use the generated `get` function which will return a variant specifying which
of the possible fields is present.  To set a union value, use the generated
`set_foo` (or `init_foo`) functions which simultaneously set (or init) the field
value and set the union discriminant.

Variant constructors are generated simply by capitalizing the first letters of
the associated union fields.  In addition, to allow forward compatibility
the constructor `Undefined of int` is added to the variant type definition.
This constructor value is returned whenever an unknown union discriminant is
decoded.

Enum Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~
Enums map to OCaml variants in the way one would expect.  Enum fields within
structs will lead to generation of `foo_get` and `foo_set` accessors which
work just like the accessors for other primitive types.

Additional Operations on Structs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
In addition to field accessors, modules associated with structs also
contain the following functions:
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(* Assuming that the struct is called Bar... *)

(** [of_message m] parses message [m] to retrieve the root struct.

    @return a reference to the content of the root struct

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val of_message : 'cap message_t -> t

(** [of_builder b] converts a read/write reference to the struct into
    a read-only interface.  (Found only in the Reader module.) *)
val of_builder : Builder.Bar.t -> Reader.Bar.t

(** [to_reader b] converts a read/write reference to the struct into
    a read-only interface.  (Found only in the Builder module.) *)
val to_reader : Builder.Bar.t -> Reader.Bar.t

(** [init_root ?message_size ()] constructs a new message and
    initializes an instance of this struct type as the root struct
    of the message.  The optional [message_size] can be used to set
    the initial message size.

    @return a reference to the content of the root struct *)
val init_root : ?message_size:int -> unit -> Bar.t

(** [to_message s] retrieves the underlying message which is used as
    the backing store for struct [s]. *)
val to_message : t -> rw message_t
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Generating Code
---------------
You will need to
http://kentonv.github.io/capnproto/install.html[install the Cap\'n Proto compiler].
Once the Cap\'n Proto compiler and capnp-ocaml are both installed, you should be
able to use `capnp compile -o ocaml yourSchemaFile.capnp` in order to generate
`yourSchemaFile.mli` and `yourSchemaFile.ml`.  These modules will link against
OCaml packages `core_kernel`, `extunix`, `uint`, `ocplib-endian`, `res`, and of
course `capnp`.

Instantiating the Modules
-------------------------
The modules generated by capnp-ocaml are functors which take the underlying
message type as input.

In principle, messages can be stored using any underlying data structure that
satisfies the `Capnp.MessageStorage.S` signature.  At present, capnp-ocaml
contains one implementation: `Capnp.BytesStorage` provides message storage in
the form of native OCaml `bytes` buffers, and `Capnp.BytesMessage` provides
a `Message` implementation based on `BytesStorage`.  This module makes it easy to
retrieve messages in a format suitable for use with file I/O, socket I/O,
etc.

To instantiate your code using BytesMessage, you could use the following
pattern:
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
module YSF = YourSchemaFile.Make(Capnp.BytesMessage)

let root_struct = YSF.Builder.Foo.init_root () in
(* ... *)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Performance
-----------
For certain applications, the overhead associated with OCaml functors may
be problematic. The functors may be eliminated by compiling with an flambda
build of the OCaml compiler (e.g. `opam switch 4.04.1+flambda`) and using the
`@inlined` annotation, like this:

[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
module YSF = YourSchemaFile.Make[@inlined](Capnp.BytesMessage)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You can use the `ocamlopt -inlining-report` option to check that the code has
been inlined. It may also be a good idea to compile with `-O3` if you care
about speed.

I Need to See an Example
------------------------
I should really put together some trivial example code.  But in the meantime,
the https://github.com/pelzlpj/capnp-ocaml/tree/master/src/tests[tests]
and https://github.com/pelzlpj/capnp-ocaml/tree/master/src/benchmark[benchmark]
subdirectories may be helpful to look at.


Installation
------------
capnp-ocaml requires OCaml >= 4.01.

You should be able to install capnp-ocaml with
http://opam.ocaml.org[OPAM] using using `opam install capnp`.

If you prefer to compile manually, you will need OMake, Findlib, and OCaml
packages `core_kernel`, `extunix`, `uint`, `ocplib-endian`, and `res`.
Run `omake` to build both the compiler and the runtime library, and then use
`omake install` to copy them into appropriate places within your filesystem.

Contact
-------
pelzlpj at gmail dot com

License
-------
Copyright (c) 2013-2014, Paul Pelzl
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification,
are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
   list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
   this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or
   other materials provided with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON
ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

Commit message:

Port to jbuilder
Effects:

- `.merlin` files are auto-generated, allowing editor auto-complete, etc.
- You can develop capnp-ocaml together with a program or library using
  it by simply putting them both in the same jbuilder workspace, without
  having to `opam reinstall` (full rebuild) on each change.
- 320 lines of `OMakefile` are replaced by 102 lines of `jbuild` files.
- Built files go under `_build`, without polluting the source
  directories.

I also copied in the schema files, rather than cloning the entire
capnproto repository. This is much faster, and prevents the build from
breaking when the temporary directory is cleaned.

The new tests/.capnp schema files were imported from https://github.com/kentonv/capnproto.git
commit 25509cf4f1fe6b3f5a6faa2f42b865f7571db8c4.

The new benchmark/.capnp schema files were imported from https://github.com/kentonv/capnproto.git
commit f536c8cfbc749f98e43b679242b24afbab8e74b2.

These were the revisions that the old omake build used.

I also added a `Makefile` that provides a quick way to build, run the
tests, etc, for people not familiar with jbuilder.

README.adoc, after:

capnp-ocaml
===========

This is an http://ocaml.org[OCaml] code generator plugin for the
http://kentonv.github.io/capnproto[Cap\'n Proto] serialization framework.

This plugin is roughly feature-complete for the Cap\'n Proto basic serialization.
The RPC feature set is not supported at this time.

Design Notes
------------
The generated code follows the general Cap\'n Proto convention of using the
serialized message format as the in-memory data structure representation. This
enables the "infinitely faster" performance characteristic, but it also means
that the generated code is not directly compatible with OCaml records, arrays,
etc.

The generated code is functorized over the underlying message format. This
enables client code to operate equally well on messages stored as--for
example--OCaml `bytes` buffers or OCaml `Bigarray` (perhaps most interesting
for applications involving `mmap()`).

Generated Code
--------------
The Cap\'n Proto types are mapped to OCaml types as follows:

.Type mapping
[width="50%",cols="2",options="header"]
|================================================
| Cap\'n Proto Type | OCaml Type
| `Void`            | `unit`
| `Bool`            | `bool`
| `Int8`            | `int`
| `Int16`           | `int`
| `Int32`           | `int32`
| `Int64`           | `int64`
| `UInt8`           | `int`
| `UInt16`          | `int`
| `UInt32`          | `Uint32.t` (from https://github.com/andrenth/ocaml-uint[`uint`] library)
| `UInt64`          | `Uint64.t` (from https://github.com/andrenth/ocaml-uint[`uint`] library)
| `Float32`         | `float`
| `Float64`         | `float`
| `Text`            | `string`
| `Data`            | `string`
| `List<T>`         | `('a, T, 'b) Capnp.Array.t`
|================================================

The `Capnp.Array` module is roughly API-compatible with OCaml arrays and
provides similar performance characteristics.

A Cap\'n Proto struct maps to an OCaml module.  The generated module hierarchy
reflects the hierarchy of structs specified in the schema file.  For example,
the Cap\'n Proto schema
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@0xbdb65202adbdc4a0;

struct Outer1 {
  struct Inner {
  }
}

struct Outer2 {
}
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
would yield a generated module with the signature
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
module type S = sig
  module Reader : sig
    module Outer1 : sig
      type t

      module Inner : sig
        type t

        (* Read-only accessors for Inner.t *)
        ...
      end

      (* Read-only accessors for Outer1.t *)
      ...
    end

    module Outer2 : sig
      type t

      (* Read-only accessors for Outer2.t *)
      ...
    end
    ...
  end

  module Builder : sig
    module Outer1 : sig
      type t

      module Inner : sig
        type t

        (* Read/write accessors for Inner.t *)
        ...
      end

      (* Read/write accessors for Outer1.t *)
      ...
    end

    module Outer2 : sig
      type t

      (* Read/write accessors for Outer2.t *)
      ...
    end
    ...
  end
end
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The `Reader` and `Builder` submodules provide read-only and read/write message
accessors, respectively.  The accessors for struct fields are constructed as
follows:

Primitive Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
A struct field `foo` of primitive type will result in generation of the
following accessors:
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(* for field 'foo' of type Void *)
val foo_get : t -> unit
val foo_set : t -> unit -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Bool *)
val foo_get : t -> bool
val foo_set : t -> bool -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Float32 or Float64 *)
val foo_get : t -> float
val foo_set : t -> float -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Text or Data *)
val has_foo : t -> bool
val foo_get : t -> string
val foo_set : t -> string -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Int8 *)
val foo_get : t -> int
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of Int8 range *)
val foo_set_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Int16 *)
val foo_get : t -> int
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of Int16 range *)
val foo_set_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Int32 *)
val foo_get : t -> int32
(* Raise [Message.Out_of_int_range] if not representable as int *)
val foo_get_int_exn : t -> int
val foo_set : t -> int32 -> unit
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of Int32 range *)
val foo_set_int_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type Int64 *)
val foo_get : t -> int64
(* Raise [Message.Out_of_int_range] if not representable as int *)
val foo_get_int_exn : t -> int
val foo_set : t -> int64 -> unit
val foo_set_int : t -> int

(* for field 'foo' of type UInt8 *)
val foo_get : t -> int
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of UInt8 range *)
val foo_set_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type UInt16 *)
val foo_get : t -> int
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of UInt16 range *)
val foo_set_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type UInt32 *)
val foo_get : t -> Uint32.t
(* Raise [Message.Out_of_int_range] if not representable as int *)
val foo_get_int_exn : t -> int
val foo_set : t -> Uint32.t -> unit
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of UInt32 range *)
val foo_set_int_exn : t -> int -> unit

(* for field 'foo' of type UInt64 *)
val foo_get : t -> Uint64.t
(* Raise [Message.Out_of_int_range] if not representable as int *)
val foo_get_int_exn : t -> int
val foo_set : t -> Uint64.t -> unit
(* Raise [Invalid_argument] if out of UInt64 range *)
val foo_set_int_exn : t -> int -> unit
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
`_get` accessors will be available in both the `Reader` and the `Builder`
modules; `_set` accessors will be available only for `Builder` types.

Embedded Struct Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
A struct field `foo` which is of struct type will result in generation of
the following accessors:
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(* Assuming that field foo has generated type Foo.t... *)

(** [has_foo s] returns [true] if field [foo] was set in structure [s]. *)
val has_foo : t -> bool

(** [foo_init s] initializes the value of field [foo] to the default value
    for its type.

    @return a reference to the content of field [foo] *)
val foo_init : t -> Foo.t

(** [foo_get s] gets a reference to the content of field [foo].  (For the
    Builder implementation, if the field was not previously initialized
    then as a side-effect this function will default-initialize the
    structure and cause [has_foo s] to return [true].)

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_get : t -> Foo.t

(** [foo_set_reader s v] sets the content of field [foo] by making a deep
    copy of the Reader-typed structure.

    @return reference to the content of field [foo]

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_set_reader : t -> Reader.Foo.t -> Builder.Foo.t

(** [foo_set_builder s v] sets the content of field [foo] by making a deep
    copy of the Builder-typed structure.

    @return reference to the content of field [foo]

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_set_builder : t -> Builder.Foo.t -> Builder.Foo.t
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

List Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~
A struct field `foo` which is of list type will result in generation of
the following accessors:
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(* Assuming that field foo contains values of type Inner... *)

(** [has_foo s] returns [true] if field [foo] was set in structure [s]. *)
val has_foo : t -> bool

(** [foo_init s n] initializes field [foo] to a zero-initialized list of
    length [n] (i.e. primitive types are initialized as zero, struct types
    are initialized as the default value for the struct type).

    @return a reference to the content of field [foo] *)
val foo_init : t -> int -> (rw, Inner.t, 'a) Capnp.Array.t

(** [foo_get s] gets a reference to the content of field [foo].  (For the
    Builder implementation, if the field was not previously initialized
    then as a side-effect this function will default-initialize the
    list and cause [has_foo s] to return [true].)

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_get : t -> ('cap, Inner.t, 'arr) Capnp.Array.t

(** [foo_get_list s] creates an OCaml list containing the content of
    field [foo].

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_get_list : t -> Inner.t list

(** [foo_get_array s] creates an OCaml array containing the content of
    field [foo].

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_get_array : t -> Inner.t array

(** [foo_set s v] sets the content of field [foo] by creating a deep copy
    of list [v].  (This may result in reallocation of [foo], which may
    lead to poor performance.)

    @return a reference to the content of field [foo]

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_set : t -> ('cap, Inner.t, 'a) Capnp.Array.t ->
                (rw, Inner.t, 'b) Capnp.Array.t

(** [foo_set_list s v] sets the content of field [foo] from OCaml list [v].
    (This may result in reallocation of [foo], which may lead to poor
    performance.)

    @return a reference to the content of field [foo]

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_set_list : t -> Inner.t list -> (rw, Inner.t, 'b) Capnp.Array.t

(** [foo_set_array s v] sets the content of field [foo] from OCaml array [v].
    (This may result in reallocation of [foo], which may lead to poor
    performance.)

    @return a reference to the content of field [foo]

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val foo_set_array : t -> Inner.t array -> (rw, Inner.t, 'b) Capnp.Array.t
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Union Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~~
Cap\'n Proto has first-class support for union (sum) types.  These are mapped
to OCaml variants in a straightforward way.  To retrieve a union value,
use the generated `get` function which will return a variant specifying which
of the possible fields is present.  To set a union value, use the generated
`set_foo` (or `init_foo`) functions which simultaneously set (or init) the field
value and set the union discriminant.

Variant constructors are generated simply by capitalizing the first letters of
the associated union fields.  In addition, to allow forward compatibility
the constructor `Undefined of int` is added to the variant type definition.
This constructor value is returned whenever an unknown union discriminant is
decoded.

Enum Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~
Enums map to OCaml variants in the way one would expect.  Enum fields within
structs will lead to generation of `foo_get` and `foo_set` accessors which
work just like the accessors for other primitive types.

Additional Operations on Structs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
In addition to field accessors, modules associated with structs also
contain the following functions:
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(* Assuming that the struct is called Bar... *)

(** [of_message m] parses message [m] to retrieve the root struct.

    @return a reference to the content of the root struct

    @raise Message.Invalid_message if the message is ill-formatted *)
val of_message : 'cap message_t -> t

(** [of_builder b] converts a read/write reference to the struct into
    a read-only interface.  (Found only in the Reader module.) *)
val of_builder : Builder.Bar.t -> Reader.Bar.t

(** [to_reader b] converts a read/write reference to the struct into
    a read-only interface.  (Found only in the Builder module.) *)
val to_reader : Builder.Bar.t -> Reader.Bar.t

(** [init_root ?message_size ()] constructs a new message and
    initializes an instance of this struct type as the root struct
    of the message.  The optional [message_size] can be used to set
    the initial message size.

    @return a reference to the content of the root struct *)
val init_root : ?message_size:int -> unit -> Bar.t

(** [to_message s] retrieves the underlying message which is used as
    the backing store for struct [s]. *)
val to_message : t -> rw message_t
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Generating Code
---------------
You will need to
http://kentonv.github.io/capnproto/install.html[install the Cap\'n Proto compiler].
Once the Cap\'n Proto compiler and capnp-ocaml are both installed, you should be
able to use `capnp compile -o ocaml yourSchemaFile.capnp` in order to generate
`yourSchemaFile.mli` and `yourSchemaFile.ml`.  These modules will link against
OCaml packages `core_kernel`, `extunix`, `uint`, `ocplib-endian`, `res`, and of
course `capnp`.

Instantiating the Modules
-------------------------
The modules generated by capnp-ocaml are functors which take the underlying
message type as input.

In principle, messages can be stored using any underlying data structure that
satisfies the `Capnp.MessageStorage.S` signature.  At present, capnp-ocaml
contains one implementation: `Capnp.BytesStorage` provides message storage in
the form of native OCaml `bytes` buffers, and `Capnp.BytesMessage` provides
a `Message` implementation based on `BytesStorage`.  This module makes it easy to
retrieve messages in a format suitable for use with file I/O, socket I/O,
etc.

To instantiate your code using BytesMessage, you could use the following
pattern:
[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
module YSF = YourSchemaFile.Make(Capnp.BytesMessage)

let root_struct = YSF.Builder.Foo.init_root () in
(* ... *)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Performance
-----------
For certain applications, the overhead associated with OCaml functors may
be problematic. The functors may be eliminated by compiling with an flambda
build of the OCaml compiler (e.g. `opam switch 4.04.1+flambda`) and using the
`@inlined` annotation, like this:

[source,ocaml]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
module YSF = YourSchemaFile.Make[@inlined](Capnp.BytesMessage)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You can use the `ocamlopt -inlining-report` option to check that the code has
been inlined. It may also be a good idea to compile with `-O3` if you care
about speed.

I Need to See an Example
------------------------
I should really put together some trivial example code.  But in the meantime,
the https://github.com/pelzlpj/capnp-ocaml/tree/master/src/tests[tests]
and https://github.com/pelzlpj/capnp-ocaml/tree/master/src/benchmark[benchmark]
subdirectories may be helpful to look at.


Installation
------------
capnp-ocaml requires OCaml >= 4.02.

You should be able to install capnp-ocaml with
http://opam.ocaml.org[OPAM] using using `opam install capnp`.

If you prefer to compile manually, you will need jbuilder, Findlib, and OCaml
packages `core_kernel`, `extunix`, `uint`, `ocplib-endian`, and `res`.
Run `jbuilder build` to build both the compiler and the runtime library,
and then use `jbuilder install` to copy them into appropriate places within your
filesystem.

Contact
-------
pelzlpj at gmail dot com

License
-------
Copyright (c) 2013-2014, Paul Pelzl
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification,
are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
   list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
   this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or
   other materials provided with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON
ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

Some of the `.capnp` schema files are imported from the Cap'n Proto repository
and have their own license (at the top of each file).
